Well, at this time, we have a regular
and much loved feature of the program
that we’ll enjoy
—The Inside Story.
Please pay close attention to this
as it’s presented by Brother James Cauthon,
one of our Gilead School instructors.
Life is often compared to music.
It has high notes as well as some low notes.
Isn’t that true?
But together they compose a melody
that is unique to ourselves.
Where does that melody go?
For faithful worshippers,
it goes directly to Jehovah’s heart.
You see, he greatly values,
not just the accomplishments in our lives,
but the journey itself.
So today we’re going to hear
from three students
in our 151st Gilead class.
As you listen to their journey,
can you hear their song?
Let’s get started.
I’m sure you’ll enjoy meeting
our first guests, Joel and Adrienne Grim,
on this edition of The Inside Story.
Adrienne, your theocratic goals
started at a very early age.
Can you tell us about that?
Yes, my parents helped me to know
that I wanted to serve Jehovah early,
and then when I was around 11
there were five young, single pioneer sisters
that all moved into my congregation
as need-greaters.
So, of course, they were my heroes.
And one of them knew
some American Sign Language,
and she started conducting Bible studies
and interpreting the meetings
for the deaf in the area.
And she started teaching me a little bit too.
I was trying to help out.
Is that you there at 11 years of age?
That’s me and my little brother.
I think about that time—yeah.
So a few years later, when I was a teenager,
the sister had to leave the area,
and so there were Bible studies there.
So I was trying to help out
as much as I could,
but it was challenging then because there
were no sign-language publications yet.
Yeah, so how did you do that
without any publications?
I tried different things.
One thing is that every Saturday night,
you would find me sitting
with The Watchtower  on one knee
and a sign-language dictionary
on the other knee,
and I would just look up every word.
You mean you looked up every  word?
Yeah, it was the best I could do at the time,
but I got a lot of help too,
because the deaf were so kind
and so generous in helping me and so patient.
I remember this one time
having a sign-language conversation
with a young girl about my age
in the back of the Kingdom Hall,
and she signed something,
and I couldn’t understand.
So I asked her to repeat it.
She repeated it,
but I still wasn’t getting it,
and we just went back and forth
with her trying
every way she could think of
to try to get me to understand
until I just had tears going down my face.
But we kept at it, and finally I got it,
and I remember we just hugged
because I finally understood.
But it was that kind of patience and kindness
that I saw over and over again
that just really touched my heart.
Yeah, well, that experience
touches our heart too.
Later you met Joel.
And Joel, you were serving
at Wallkill Bethel at the time,
and things worked out
—Adrienne, you became a Bethel bride.
And then later you both decided to join
the sign-language congregation.
Now, Adrienne already knew
(ASL) sign language, right?
But, Joel, you had to learn it.
So how was that for you?
Well, after learning sign language,
for one thing, I will never look
at 1 Corinthians 9:22 the same way again.
So, what does 1 Corinthians 9:22
have to do with learning a language?
Well, that’s where Paul says that he became
“all things to people of all sorts.”
And that’s very true
when you’re learning a language.
Language is more
than just collecting vocabulary
so that you can communicate with someone.
You have to get to know
the way that person thinks.
Well, there’s no doubt
that language can affect the way we think,
but can you give us an example?
Sure.
Imagine there are two people
having a conversation,
and you want to get to the other side.
Now, the way I grew up, my culture,
is that I need to approach them
and excuse myself, be acknowledged,
and then I can move on.
But in sign language it’s different.
If two people are having
a signed conversation,
they value their eye contact
and the flow of their communication
much more than they value
my idea of what’s polite.
So in sign language, you just move on
straight through the conversation
with minimal distraction
and no weaving and dancing and bobbing.
No, you just go straight on through.
No weaving, no dancing,
no bobbing, just straight through
—we should have applied that
to your assignments in class.
There’s probably some truth to that.
So it was difficult to adapt.
But, of course, you know, after some time,
I got the hang of it.
And there were other adjustments, of course,
that you have to make for culture.
And I learned a valuable lesson,
and that is that language and culture
are intrinsically linked.
You can’t really have one without the other.
And if you’re learning a new language,
you have to just adapt.
You have to be willing to change,
and the best thing to do is that if there are
no Scriptural principles involved,
just adopt the culture and the value
of the native language users.
And that’s what Paul meant when he said:
“Become all things to people of all sorts.”
Well, no doubt Paul was
an excellent example in that regard,
and it sounds like you were too.
So where did your journey in sign language
take you next?
Well, there we were at Bethel,
but we really were hoping
that we would get a chance to go to Gilead.
But we were advised that it would be
a good idea to pioneer together first.
So we left Bethel, and we moved to Tennessee
and joined a sign-language group down there,
and we really did love that group.
We sure did.
We met some wonderful brothers and sisters,
and we had some great experiences
there in Tennessee.
After a few years, the circuit overseer
asked us if we would be willing
to move to Texas to support
a sign-language congregation there,
and so we did
—and, again, just wonderful times
and great brothers and sisters.
But we were only there about a year,
and then we got invited back
to Wallkill Bethel.
So we went back to Wallkill
and after a few more years there,
the brothers called us one day
and asked us if we would be willing
to transfer to the RTO,
the remote translation office,
in Fort Lauderdale, Florida,
where they translate
into American Sign Language.
And we were there for five years.
This is a picture
of the residence buildings there.
It looks very beautiful.
So how did you like that assignment?
I loved it!
Remember I told you
that when I first started in sign language,
there were no sign-language publications.
So then as they started coming out,
we had the opportunity to see the impact
that those publications had
on so many people’s lives.
So we already treasured those.
And then to get a chance
to kind of get a glimpse behind the scenes
and see how much love and hard work
goes into all of those translations
really was powerful.
I loved it!
And so, what publication
are we looking at here?
So this is when we were working
on the very first meeting workbook,
and this is when we were working
on the sign-language version of that one.
Really, working in the Translation Department
was such a beautiful way
to see Jehovah’s love for all people.
I’m sure that was excellent,
and you learned good lessons there.
Joel, how were you affected
by supporting the sign-language field?
Well, in many ways, but one way is definitely
that I learned to be more empathetic.
Do you mind if I share
an experience that I had?
Well, we’d be pleased to hear it.
OK,
well, when we were in Tennessee,
we had the privilege
of studying with a deaf man named Fred.
Now, Fred had been to many churches,
but he was unsatisfied.
The local publishers
found him in the ministry,
and he agreed to a Bible study.
And Fred loved to learn.
He especially loved watching the ASL Bible,
the portions of it
that we had available at that time.
And he also loved to read
the Insight  volumes.
He just had an insatiable desire
for knowledge.
He would show up to the meetings,
and he would ask us questions about them.
So he might come and say,
“OK, I have two questions:
about Elijah and Elizabeth.”
And we’d think, ‘Oh, he’s in the e’s now.’
One day, Fred’s wife told us a little story.
She said that she had found him
in the bedroom at home
sitting on the edge of the bed
with his eyes closed just signing.
And she thought
something was wrong with him,
so she interrupted him and said,
“What are you doing?”
And he told her that he was praying.
When I heard that, it touched my heart.
It was so beautiful to know
that Fred was developing strong faith
and that he knew
that Jehovah knows sign language
and that he was watching his prayers.
It was really something.
This is a picture of Fred
on the day that he got baptized.
So that’s great. Thanks for sharing that.
But now I ask you,
Was it smooth sailing for Fred after that?
No.
No, he had many challenges,
and one of those was
that he was losing his eyesight gradually.
And that was tough for him.
Here was a man who loved to learn.
He relied on the sign-language videos
for spiritual food,
and he was going blind.
But he didn’t give up.
In his 60’s, he started to learn braille,
and he also had to learn tactile signing.
Now, “tactile”—could you explain that?
Sure.
Now, on its most basic level, “tactile” is
“signing into another person’s hands
so that they can feel the signs
and understand what’s being communicated.”
So that congregation there in Tennessee
was just full of self-sacrificing brothers
and sisters who would help him.
They would go over to his house
and help him prepare for the meetings
by signing the information into his hands
so that he could know
what was going to be discussed.
And then at the Kingdom Hall
during the meetings, we would all pitch in
and do tactile signing for him
so that he could keep up and follow along
with the meetings.
This is a picture of him there
listening to one of the congregation meetings
in sign language.
You know, that shows a lot of determination
not just by Fred
but by those in the congregation,
yourselves as well.
Thank you for that.
Now, Fred was determined,
and he would be there
following along with the meetings.
And you know, there might be a question.
And so his hand would just shoot up.
He wanted to comment,
and I would see that and think,
‘Wow, you know, Fred is getting it,
and he’s still able to participate.’
It was beautiful.
Yeah, it is inspiring.
We appreciate you sharing that.
So now in conclusion,
how do you think your experiences
with the sign-language field
have helped you to prepare
for any future assignments
that may come your way?
I feel like it’s helped me
to learn to be adaptable
and to remember that there’s not just
one way that things should be done,
and also, when you’re meeting new people,
to really work to try to see the person
and not just what you see at first glance.
Joel?
Yeah, I think about Fred a lot.
He would express frustration
at his situation and the challenges
he was facing, but he wouldn’t dwell on it.
He would very quickly redirect
his attention to Jehovah
and how Jehovah was supporting him
to get through those challenges.
Getting to know him helped me
to be more empathetic.
But I also saw his humility
and the fact that he would not give up
in the face of adversity.
So those are some qualities
that I want to continue to develop
wherever our journey takes us.
Those are great expressions.
Thank you both.
Thank you for sharing your story.
And by the way, how do you sign
“thank you”?
Thank you.
Our next guest is Brother Christopher Kitts.
Before he came to Gilead,
he had a very interesting assignment.
Please welcome Chris.
Chris,
before we talk
about your most recent assignment,
I’d like to talk about your early years
as a zealous evangelizer.
OK.
So in this picture, how old were you?
I was about four years old right there.
Four years old
—and I see even back in the day
that you were very fashion-conscious.
Thank you.
Personally, I think
it’s the socks with the sandals
that brought that whole outfit together.
Yeah!
Well, we love the picture,
and we understand you have
a love for the ministry too.
So tell us a little bit
about those early years.
Yeah, I always had joy in the ministry.
I loved it!
It was my happy place.
My mother would pick me up
from school as a kid,
and she would take me out
with her and the other pioneers.
And when I got baptized,
I started auxiliary pioneering.
Then as soon as I graduated from high school,
I started regular pioneering.
Wow, that’s excellent, Chris!
Now, I understand that you also have
a theocratic goal from a very young age.
Yeah, I got baptized at 10,
and my circuit overseer at the time
was Richard Ashe.
And he got down on his knee,
and he said to me,
“Christopher, when you grow up,
you’re going to be
a circuit overseer just like me.”
And his words had a big impact
on my little heart.
I cherished them.
And I actually set circuit work as a goal.
Well, did you meet that goal?
I did, but we had a lot of work to do
before we got there.
In 2005,
I went to the Ministerial Training School,
and then after that,
I got assigned
from where I grew up
in Long Island, New York,
to the potato farms of Wisconsin
in a little town called Antigo.
I spent three years there,
and then I went to Amish country.
I spent six years
in an even smaller town called Neillsville.
And then I spent three years
in Wausau, a little city.
And that experience was amazing
because that’s where
Jehovah gave me my training.
I learned a lot about myself.
Jehovah rubbed off a lot
of the rough edges.
I learned about faith,
because in those assignments,
I saw Jehovah always provide me
with work and places to live
in areas where sometimes there weren’t.
And I saw some of my Bible students
progress to baptism,
and I made friendships
that will last forever.
And then in 2018,
I was invited into the circuit work
down in Richmond, Virginia.
And that was amazing!
I was in the circuit work there
for about a year.
And it was about 30 years later
that I ran into Brother Ashe
when I was visiting Bethel,
and I got to tell him he was right.
I got to share with him
what an impact he had on me
as a child.
And it really made me think of the impact
that spiritually mature ones
can have on young ones,
helping them to set goals
that can help them have the best life now.
That’s an excellent experience!
Thank you for sharing, Chris.
So it must have been a great moment
for the two of you.
But, now, what surprising assignment
followed that?
Yeah, I was appointed as a missionary,
and I was sent to the East Africa branch,
and I was assigned to circuit work
in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
So from Virginia to Tanzania
—that’s quite a jump!
Yeah.
So how did you feel about that?
I was excited!
It was a new adventure.
I didn’t know the language,
so I’d have to learn Swahili.
I’d have to learn Tanzanian Sign Language,
so I would have an interpreter
that would travel with me
from congregation to congregation.
So it was a new adventure for me
with Jehovah and with a new culture.
I couldn’t wait!
There must have been challenges,
though, and I think
you related one or more to me
that happened soon after you got there.
So can you tell us about that
and the effect it had on you?
Yeah.
Yeah, as soon as I arrived
in my assignment in Dar es Salaam,
the COVID-19 pandemic started.
And so now I wasn’t going to be able
to visit the congregations in person.
I would not meet
the brothers and sisters face to face.
I would have to serve them
over Zoom and over the phone.
And about six months into my assignment,
I woke up one morning
and I had some pressure on my chest.
And I was feeling anxiety
because I was alone
—I was isolated.
My interpreter lived six hours away.
He connected over Zoom and over the phone.
And because I showed up
to this little village
at the same time the pandemic started
and as a foreigner not knowing the language,
it created some real difficulties
between me and some of the villagers.
So I was feeling anxiety.
I was feeling alone.
There were times I was scared,
and for one of the first times in my life,
I was feeling depressed.
So I went to Jehovah in prayer,
and I asked him:
“Did I do something wrong?
Should I go home?”
Chris, that must have been
such a difficult time.
How did Jehovah help you?
Jehovah is amazing!
He helped me right away
to see what the solution was.
I was giving so much in the assignment.
I needed more time alone with Jehovah.
So I started waking up
at 5:30 in the morning,
and that’s early for me.
I like my sleep.
But it was what I needed.
I’d make my coffee, and I would go outside,
and I’d watch the African sun wake up.
And as I would watch the sunrise,
I felt peace
because I felt like Jehovah
was right there with me.
And it grounded me;
it put me in the right frame of mind
to start my Bible reading.
And so before I started,
I would say a prayer to Jehovah,
and I asked him: “Jehovah, talk to me.
Let me hear your voice.”
And then I started my reading,
and I would read until I found something
that applied to me.
And then I’d stop,
meditate, think about it,
and talk to Jehovah about it.
And that really brought me peace.
That helped calm me down.
I would be reading,
and there were times when it was
as if the words would pop off the page.
For example, there was one morning
when I was in the book
of Lamentations chapter 3,
and I was reading verse 22.
And it said there:
“It is because of Jehovah’s loyal love
that we have not come to our finish.”
And when I read that, I thought,
‘Jehovah is protecting me in my assignment.’
And then it said next:
“For his mercies never end.
They are new each morning.”
And that was true.
I was seeing Jehovah’s mercy every morning.
His undeserved kindness
was painting me a new sunrise.
But verse 24 is what changed my life.
It says:
“Jehovah is my share.”
Jehovah was with me.
And it says next:
“That is why
I will show a waiting attitude for him.”
And it was like Jehovah was saying:
‘Chris, just wait.
Don’t give up.’
That brought me so much peace
after I read that scripture.
My anxiety went away.
The fears that I had were gone.
And as long as I maintained that routine,
I didn’t feel depressed.
I just continued in my assignment.
I found that I had more energy
to give to the brothers and sisters.
I was able to spend more time shepherding.
And on Saturdays, I would spend time
with the young ones on Zoom
and listen to their stories
and find out what they were doing
to help them get through the pandemic.
And their answers built my faith.
Chris, I believe you were going
to share one of those
(a picture of one of those)
beautiful African sunrises with us.
Is that not true?
Yeah, that picture
doesn’t even do it justice.
Yeah, I can see why that would help you.
And, you know, we don’t typically think
of the book of Lamentations
as a book of comfort,
but that’s a great scripture to remember.
So thanks for sharing that with us.
Now, Chris, as you look back on your journey,
you definitely had some high notes
and some low notes.
So, what lessons have you learned?
I learned that love transcends language.
Love has the ability to bypass the mind
when words are formed into sentences,
and it can pierce right into the heart,
where emotions and feelings come from.
I needed an interpreter
to translate my words,
but love needs no interpretation.
Those brothers and sisters could see
how much I loved them
as I struggled to learn their language.
And I saw how much they loved me
as they patiently worked with me
and helped me.
And I could see Jehovah’s love for them.
It was coming off the pages of the Bible
as we read them scriptures.
And I could see
their love for Jehovah as they
implicitly followed the direction
from the Governing Body.
They viewed it as coming from Jehovah,
and they followed it
even if it came to them at a cost.
And I also learned
that you can see Jehovah in creation
and that you can hear his voice
in your Bible reading
and that you can feel his love
coming from the brothers and sisters
even over Zoom.
And this assignment taught me
that even if you feel lonely
or if you’re isolated
because of a pandemic
or you’re in prison bonds,
you’re never alone.
Chris, thank you for sharing
your illuminating story with us.
Thank you very much.
So could you hear it, friends?
As you saw,
each of our students
had a unique journey
in their service to Jehovah.
Things didn’t always go as planned.
There were some setbacks,
and there were some tears.
But in each case,
they fully relied on their Father, Jehovah,
and with his help,
they got past those low notes,
and we can too,
because Jehovah greatly values
not just our accomplishments
but also the journey itself.
Your faithful service
is like a pleasing melody in Jehovah’s heart.
He cherishes all that you do for his name.
And remembering that should give us
comfort, hope, and joy even now.
The words of Isaiah chapter 30
echo this thought.
Let me read this for us.
This would be Isaiah 30:29.
It says:
“But your song will be
“like the one sung in the night
when you prepare for a festival,
“and your heart will rejoice
like one who walks with a flute
on his way to the mountain of Jehovah,
to the Rock of Israel.”
So, brothers and sisters, don’t give up,
and don’t stop making beautiful music.
Till the next time on The Inside Story.
Well, those comments were priceless.
Thank you very much, Brother Cauthon,
and you students, soon-to-be graduates,
who were involved with that program.
That was delightful.